Data structures are the fundamental building blocks of computer programming. They define how data is organized, stored, and manipulated within a program. Understanding data structures is very important for developing efficient and effective algorithms. In this tutorial, we will explore the most commonly used data structures, including arrays, linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, and graphs.
What is Data Structure?: A data structure is a storage that is used to store and organize data. It is a way of arranging data on a computer so that it can be accessed and updated efficiently. A data structure is not only used for organizing the data. It is also used for processing, retrieving, and storing data. There are different basic and advanced types of data structures that are used in almost every program or software system that has been developed. So we must have good knowledge about data structures.
1. Array:: Array is a linear data structure that stores a collection of elements of the same data type. Elements are allocated contiguous memory, allowing for constant-time access. Each element has a unique index number.
4. Stack: Stack is a linear data structure that follows the Last In, First Out (LIFO) principle. Stacks play an important role in managing function calls, memory, and are widely used in algorithms, web development, and systems like compilers and browsers.
5. Queue: Queue is a linear data structure that follows the First In, First Out (FIFO) principle. Queues play an important role in managing tasks or data in order, scheduling and message handling systems.
6. Linked List: Linked list is a linear data structure that stores data in nodes, which are connected by pointers. Unlike arrays, nodes of linked lists are not stored in contiguous memory locations and can only be accessed sequentially, starting from the head of list.
7. Hash: Hashing is a technique that generates a fixed-size output (hash value) from an input of variable size using mathematical formulas called hash functions. Hashing is commonly used in data structures for efficient searching, insertion and deletion and plays a key role in software applications like secure data retrieval, password storage, cryptography, digital signatures, etc.
8. Tree: Tree is a non-linear, hierarchical data structure consisting of nodes connected by edges, with a top node called the root and nodes having child nodes. It is widely used in file systems, databases, decision-making algorithms, etc.
10. Binary Search Tree: Binary Search Tree is a type of binary tree in which each node's left subtree contains only values smaller than the node, and each node's right subtree contains only values greater than the node.  This property applies recursively, meaning that for every node, its left and right subtrees must also satisfy the conditions of a valid Binary Search Tree.
11. Heap: Heap is a complete binary tree data structure that satisfies the heap property. Heaps are usually used to implement priority queues, where the smallest or largest element is always at the root of the tree.
12. Graph: Graph is a non-linear data structure consisting of a finite set of vertices(or nodes) and a set of edges(or links)that connect a pair of nodes. Graphs are widely used to represent relationships between entities.
13. Advanced Data Structures: Advanced Data Structures are complex arrangement of data which are used to organize, store, and manipulate data efficiently, enabling faster and more effective processing in complex algorithms. Unlike basic data types such as arrays and linked lists, these structures include more sophisticated options like Segment Trees, Trie, Binary Indexed Tree, Suffix Array etc.
Web development refers to the creating, building, and maintaining of websites. It includes aspects such as web design, web publishing, web programming, and database management. It is the creation of an application that works over the internet i.e. websites. Web development is typically broken down into 3 core areas: Frontend, Backend, Full Stack Development.
Frontend Development: The Face of the Web. The part of a website where the user interacts directly is termed as front end. This involves designing the structure, layout, and behavior of the website It is also referred to as the ‘client side’ of the application.
Backend Development: The Backbone of the Web. Backend is the server side of a website. It is part of the website that users cannot see and interact with. It is the portion of software that does not come in direct contact with the users. It is used to store and arrange data.
Server-side Programming Languages and Frameworks: Backend Languages Backend Frameworks PHP Laravel, Wordpress Java Spring, Hibernate Python Django, Flask, Python PIP Node.js Express Ruby Ruby on Rails C# .NET
Full Stack Development: Full-stack development refers to the practice of developing both the frontend and backend of a website or web application. Full-stack developers have a deep understanding of both areas and can build end-to-end solutions.
Databases: In web technology, a database is a structured collection of data that is stored electronically and accessed via a web application. It serves as the backend component where data is stored, managed, and retrieved. Databases can be relational (like MySQL, PostgreSQL) using structured tables and SQL for queries, or non-relational (like MongoDB, CouchDB) which store data in flexible, document-oriented formats. They enable web applications to handle dynamic content, user data, transactions, and more by providing efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation capabilities. Database management systems (DBMS) are used to interact with the database, ensuring data integrity, security, and performance.
1. Relational Databases: A relational database stores data in tables, similar to a spreadsheet, where each table has rows and columns. The rows hold individual records, and the columns define the data attributes. Tables can be linked to each other through special keys, allowing related data to be connected.
2. NoSQL Databases: A NoSQL database stores data in a flexible, non-tabular format, unlike traditional relational databases. Instead of using tables with rows and columns, NoSQL databases might use documents, key-value pairs, wide-columns, or graphs to store data. This allows them to handle large amounts of unstructured or semi-structured data efficiently. They are designed to scale easily and manage big data applications. Must Read :
Computer science is a popular topic of study today, with numerous applications spanning a wide range. Final-year students frequently find it difficult to select the appropriate computer science project. On the final day of graduation, projects are the only thing that matters. Any IT-related industry where projects have a substantial impact can be chosen for a job or further education. Project work indicates knowledge depth as well as some soft skills like creativity and problem-solving. Your interview prospects will also improve as a result of your final-year projects. As a result, in their last year of graduation, students are required to complete a project.
1. What is Computer Science?: Computer science (CS) is the study of computers and algorithmic processes including their principles, their hardware and software designs, their applications, and their impact on society.
2. Which is the best project in the final year?: The best final-year project is subjective and depends on your interests and skills. Choose a project that appeals to your interests, challenges you, and provides real learning possibilities.
Computer Networks is an important subject in the GATE Computer Science syllabus. It encompasses fundamental concepts like Network Models, Routing Algorithms, Congestion Control, TCP/IP Protocol Suite, and Network Security. These topics are essential for understanding how data is transmitted, managed, and secured across networks. This article provides Last Minute Notes for Computer Networks that focuses on the most important topics that are frequently asked in GATE. Table of Content
OSI Model: OSI stands for Open Systems Interconnection. It has been developed by ISO–  International Organization for Standardization, in the year 1984. It is a seven-layer architecture with each layer having specific functionality to perform.
Physical Layer: The Physical Layer in the OSI model is responsible for the actual transmission of raw data bits over a physical medium. It manages how data is encoded into signals and transmitted through the communication medium.
Basics: Transmission Delay (Td) = Length of packet/Bandwidth Propagation Delay (Pd) = Distance/Velocity Round Trip Time is the overall time taken in transmitting a packet, it is also known as minimum acknowledgment waiting time.
Flow Control Mechanisms: Stop & Wait Protocol  Only one data packet can be shared over the link and the sender has to wait for the positive acknowledgment so that it can send another packet. It leads to poor efficiency and poor resource utilization. Sliding Window Protocol Go Back N It is also known as “conservative protocol”, and uses cumulative/piggybacking acknowledgments. The receiver window size is 1, and the sender window size is 2k  -1 where K is the number of bits received for the window size in the header. Selective Repeat ARQ Selective Repeat ARQ retransmits only the lost or corrupted frames instead of all subsequent frames, ensuring higher efficiency and reduced redundancy compared to Go-Back-N. Comparison of Data Link Layer Protocols Framing in DLL : Framing provides a way for a sender to transmit a set of bits that are meaningful to the receiver.
Medium Access Control Protocols: They manage how devices share a common communication medium and ensure efficient and collision-free data transmission. MAC protocols are generally classified into the following categories: A. Contention-Based Protocols In these protocols, devices compete for the medium, and collisions may occur. They are suitable for networks with more traffic. Examples : These protocols avoid collisions by controlling access to the medium. Examples : Error Control
Network Layer: Class Full Addressing is an IP addressing method that divides the address space into five classes: A, B, C, D, and E, based on the first few bits of the IP address. Each class has a fixed network and host portion. Class Full Addressing
Subnetting: Subnetting dividing a bigger network into a smaller network to maintain the security of the network is known as subnetting. Implementation : Let’s consider a network 192.168.1.0/24 (subnet mask: 255.255.255.0), we need to create 4 subnets. Each subnet has: A subnet mask is a 32-bit number used in IPv4 to divide an IP address into network and host portions. It helps identify the size of the network and enables subnetting by determining which part of the address belongs to the network and which to the host. Subnet Mask of Class C IP address Supernetting: Multiple smaller networks are combined to form a bigger network, it is known as Supernetting. It is mainly used in router summarization, etc. VLSM: Variable Length Subnet Mask is where the subnet design uses more than one mask in the same network which means more than one mask is used for different subnets of a single class A, B, C, or a network. It is also defined as the process of subnetting a subnet. It is used to increase the usability of subnets as they can be of variable size. Internet Control Message Protocol: Since IP does not have an inbuilt mechanism for sending error and control messages. It depends on Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP) to provide error control. Difference between DVR and LSR: Hop Count: Hop count is the number of routers between the source and destination network. The path with the lowest hop count is considered the best route to reach a network and therefore placed in the routing table. Open shortest path first (OSPF):Open the shortest path first (OSPF) is a link-state routing protocol that is used to find the best path between the source and the destination router using its own SPF algorithm.Designated Router(DR) and Backup Designated Router(BDR) election takes place in the broadcast network or multi-access network. Routing Information Protocol (RIP): RIP is a dynamic routing protocol that uses hop count as a routing metric to find the best path between the source and the destination network. It is a distance vector routing protocol that has an AD value of 120 and works on the application layer of the OSI model. RIP uses port number 520. An ARP (Address Resolution Protocol) request is a network protocol used to map an IP address to its corresponding MAC (Media Access Control) address within a local network. Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) is a network protocol used to obtain an IP address for a device (like a diskless workstation) from its MAC address
Application Layer: Application Layer is the topmost layer of the OSI model and it directly interacts with web applications or application services. This layer provides several ways for manipulating the data (information) which actually enables any type of user to access the network with ease.
Important Port number and transport mode used by Protocols: Port Number TCP/UDP Protocol Name 80 TCP HTTP 443 TCP HTTPS 21 TCP FTP (to establish a connection between computers) 20 TCP FTP (to transfer data) 22 TCP SSH 25 TCP SMTP 53 UDP DNS See Last Minute Notes on all subjects here.
